h1. Asynchronous programming with HTTP

This section explains how to deal with asynchronism in a Play application to achieve typical long-polling, streaming and other "Comet-style":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comet_(programming%29 applications that can scale to thousands of concurrent connections.

h2. Suspending HTTP requests

Play 1.12 dispatches request invocation on "virtual threads":https://openjdk.org/jeps/491. Each incoming request gets its own virtual thread, and blocking on a virtual thread is essentially free — the JVM unmounts the carrier thread for the duration of the block. Two platform threads service timer dispatch; everything else runs on unbounded virtual threads. There is no fixed pool size to tune (the legacy @play.pool@ / @play.threads.virtual*@ keys have been removed; "Play.java" emits a WARN if they are still present in @application.conf@).

Even with virtual threads, you may still want to **suspend** an HTTP request — for example, a chat long-poll that waits seconds or minutes for the next message. Suspending releases the request from any continuation context and lets Play resume it later when a @Promise@ is redeemed or after a fixed delay. The request stays connected the whole time.

For example, this action will launch a very long job and wait for its completion before returning the result to the HTTP response:

bc. public static void generatePDF(Long reportId) {
    Promise<InputStream> pdf = new ReportAsPDFJob(report).now();
    InputStream pdfStream = await(pdf);
    renderBinary(pdfStream);
}

Here we use @await(…)@ to ask Play to suspend the request until the @Promise<InputStream>@ value is redeemed. 

h3. Continuations

Even though virtual threads make blocking cheap, suspend/resume continuations remain useful for cases where the framework needs to drop the request out of its current execution context entirely (for example, to fire it again after a fixed delay or against a different scheduling primitive). In the previous Play version the @await(…)@ equivalent was @waitFor(…)@, which suspended your action, and then called it again later from the beginning.

To make it easier to deal with asynchronous code we have introduced continuations. Continuations allow your code to be suspended and resumed transparently. So you write your code in a very imperative way, as:

bc. public static void computeSomething() {
    Promise<String> delayedResult = veryLongComputation(…);
    String result = await(delayedResult);
    render(result);
}

In fact here, your code will be executed in two steps, in two different threads. But as you see, it is transparent to your application code.

Using @await(…)@ and continuations, you could write a loop:

bc. public static void loopWithoutBlocking() {
    for(int i=0; i<=10; i++) { 
         Logger.info(i);
         await("1s");
    }
    renderText("Loop finished");
}

Play runs each of these loops on its own virtual thread, so many such loops can run concurrently without any explicit pool sizing.

A more realistic example is asynchronously fetching content from remote URLs. The following example, performs three remote HTTP requests in parallel: each call to the @play.libs.WS.WSRequest.getAsync()@ method executes a GET request asynchronously and returns a @play.libs.F.Promise@. The action method suspends the incoming HTTP request by calling @await(…)@ on the combination of the three @Promise@ instances. When all three remote calls have a response, a thread will resume processing and render a response.

bc. public class AsyncTest extends Controller {
 
  public static void remoteData() {
    F.Promise<WS.HttpResponse> r1 = WS.url("http://example.org/1").getAsync();
    F.Promise<WS.HttpResponse> r2 = WS.url("http://example.org/2").getAsync();
    F.Promise<WS.HttpResponse> r3 = WS.url("http://example.org/3").getAsync();
  
    F.Promise<List<WS.HttpResponse>> promises = F.Promise.waitAll(r1, r2, r3);
 
    // Suspend processing here, until all three remote calls are complete.
    List<WS.HttpResponse> httpResponses = await(promises);
 
    render(httpResponses);
  }
}


h3. Callbacks

A different way to implement the previous example of three asynchronous remote requests is to use a callback. This time, the call to @await(…)@ includes a @play.libs.F.Action@ implementation, which is a callback that is executed when the @promises@ are done.

bc. public class AsyncTest extends Controller {
 
  public static void remoteData() {
    F.Promise<WS.HttpResponse> r1 = WS.url("http://example.org/1").getAsync();
    F.Promise<WS.HttpResponse> r2 = WS.url("http://example.org/2").getAsync();
    F.Promise<WS.HttpResponse> r3 = WS.url("http://example.org/3").getAsync();
 
    F.Promise<List<WS.HttpResponse>> promises = F.Promise.waitAll(r1, r2, r3);
 
    // Suspend processing here, until all three remote calls are complete.
    await(promises, new F.Action<List<WS.HttpResponse>>() {
      public void invoke(List<WS.HttpResponse> httpResponses) {
        render(httpResponses);
      }
    });
  }
}


h2. HTTP response streaming

Now that you can loop without blocking the request, you may want to send data to the browser as soon you have part of the result available. That is the point of the @Content-Type:Chunked@ HTTP response type. It allows to send your HTTP response several times using multiples chunks. The browser will receive these chunks as soon as they are published.

Using @await(…)@ and continuations, you can now achieve that using:

bc. public static void generateLargeCSV() {
    CSVGenerator generator = new CSVGenerator();
    response.contentType = "text/csv";
    while(generator.hasMoreData()) {
          String someCsvData = await(generator.nextDataChunk());
          response.writeChunk(someCsvData);
    }
}

Even if the CSV generation takes one hour, Play is able to simultaneously process several requests — each on its own virtual thread — sending back the generated data to the client as soon as it is available.


h2. Using WebSockets

WebSockets are a way to open a two-way communication channel between a browser and your application. On the browser side, you open a socket using a "ws://" url:

bc. new WebSocket("ws://localhost:9000/helloSocket?name=Guillaume")

On the Play side you declare a WS route:

bc. WS   /helloSocket            MyWebSocket.hello

@MyWebSocket@ is a @WebSocketController@. A WebSocket controller is like a standard HTTP controller but handles different concepts.

* It has a request object, but no response object.
* It has access to the session, but read-only.
* It doesn't have @renderArgs@, @routeArgs@ or flash scope.
* It can read params only from the route pattern or from the QueryString.
* It has two communication channels: inbound and outbound.

When the client connects to the @ws://localhost:9000/helloSocket@ socket, Play will invoke the @MyWebSocket.hello@ action method. Once the @MyWebSocket.hello@ action method exits, the socket is closed.

So a very basic socket example would be:

bc. public class MyWebSocket extends WebSocketController {
 
    public static void hello(String name) {
        outbound.send("Hello %s!", name);
    }
}

Here when the client connects to the socket, it receive the ‘Hello Guillaume’ message, and then Play closes the socket.

Of course usually you don’t want to close the socket immediately. But it is easy to achieve using @await(…)@ and continuations.

For example a basic Echo server:

bc. public class MyWebSocket extends WebSocketController {
 
    public static void echo() {
        while(inbound.isOpen()) {
             WebSocketEvent e = await(inbound.nextEvent());
             if(e instanceof WebSocketFrame) {
                  WebSocketFrame frame = (WebSocketFrame)e;
                  if(!e.isBinary) {
                      if(frame.textData.equals("quit")) {
                          outbound.send("Bye!");
                          disconnect();
                      } else {
                          outbound.send("Echo: %s", frame.textData);
                      }
                  }
             }
             if(e instanceof WebSocketClose) {
                 Logger.info("Socket closed!");
             }
        }
    }
 
}

In the previous example, the nested ‘if’ and ‘cast’ soup was tedious to write and error prone. And here Java sucks. Even for this simple case it is not easy to handle. And for more complicated cases where you combine several streams, and have even more event types, it becomes a nightmare.

That’s why we have introduced a basic pattern matching in Java in the "play.libs.F":libs#FunctionalprogrammingwithJava library.

So we can rewrite our previous echo sample as:

bc. public static void echo() {
    while(inbound.isOpen()) {
         WebSocketEvent e = await(inbound.nextEvent());
         
         for(String quit: TextFrame.and(Equals("quit")).match(e)) {
             outbound.send("Bye!");
             disconnect();
         }
 
         for(String message: TextFrame.match(e)) {
             outbound.send("Echo: %s", message);
         }
         
         for(WebSocketClose closed: SocketClosed.match(e)) {
             Logger.info("Socket closed!");
         }
    }
}

p(note). **Continuing the discussion**
 
Next, doing %(next)"Ajax request":ajax%.
