h1. Use a cache

For high-performance systems you sometimes need to keep computed values around between requests. Play ships a typed, dependency-inverted cache contract (PF-88) backed by "Caffeine":https://github.com/ben-manes/caffeine — a high-throughput in-process cache with W-TinyLFU eviction. The framework jar bundles the Caffeine provider; alternate backends (EhCache, a no-op for tests, a custom tiered store) plug in through the same SPI.

The cache contract is intentionally minimal: a cache is fast, but values expire and the store is in memory only — a process restart drops everything. Code defensively. The pattern is always "look up; on miss, recompute and store":

bc. private static final Cache<String, List<Product>> productsCache =
    Caches.named("products", CacheConfig.newBuilder()
        .expireAfterWrite(Duration.ofMinutes(30))
        .maximumSize(1000)
        .recordStats(true)
        .build());

public static void allProducts() {
    List<Product> products = productsCache.get("all", k -> Product.findAll());
    render(products);
}

@Caches.named(name, config)@ is idempotent per name — the first call constructs the cache through the active provider; subsequent calls with the same name return the same instance regardless of the @config@ argument. Treat the @Caches.named(...)@ expression as a singleton lookup; cache it in a @static final@ field at the call site.

h2. <a name="api">The cache API</a>

The contract lives in @play.cache.Cache<K, V>@ and is small on purpose:

bc. // Look up; null on miss.
V getIfPresent(K key);

// Look up; on miss, run loader and store its result. Atomic per key.
V get(K key, Function<? super K, ? extends V> loader);

// Store a value. Replaces any existing entry; resets the TTL clock.
void put(K key, V value);

// Drop one entry, or all entries.
void invalidate(K key);
void invalidateAll();

// Approximate entry count, for monitoring.
long estimatedSize();

// Lifetime stats — zero snapshot if recordStats(false).
CacheStats stats();

The contract has no @add@/@replace@/@incr@/@decr@/@safeSet@/@safeDelete@ surface — those existed in the legacy memcached-era facade and are gone. For atomic increments, hold the counter in a @ConcurrentHashMap@ (caches are not the right primitive for shared state). For "set if absent" semantics, use @get(key, loader)@.

h2. <a name="config">Configuring a cache</a>

@CacheConfig@ is an immutable builder:

bc. CacheConfig config = CacheConfig.newBuilder()
    .expireAfterWrite(Duration.ofMinutes(30))   // TTL from the most recent write
    .expireAfterAccess(Duration.ofMinutes(10))  // TTL from the most recent read or write
    .maximumSize(10_000)                        // bound entry count; -1 = unbounded
    .recordStats(true)                          // populate hit/miss/load/eviction counters
    .build();

All fields are optional. The default is an unbounded cache with no expiration and no stats — fine for short-lived process state, dangerous for unbounded inputs. *Set @maximumSize@ for any cache keyed by user-derived data.*

h2. <a name="cacheFor">@@CacheFor for actions</a>

The @@CacheFor@ annotation caches a controller action's @Result@ for a configurable TTL:

bc. import play.cache.*;
public class Application extends Controller {

    @CacheFor("5s")
    public static void indexCachedShort() {
        renderText("Current time is: " + new Date());
    }

    @CacheFor("1h")
    public static void indexCachedLong() {
        renderText("Current time is: " + new Date());
    }
}

The annotation accepts duration shorthands: @s@ (seconds), @min@ (minutes), @h@ (hours), @d@ (days). Default is @1h@. Each distinct TTL value gets its own backing cache (named @play.actions.5s@, @play.actions.1h@, ...) so per-cache @expireAfterWrite@ matches the declared TTL — Caffeine eviction is per-cache, not per-entry.

@@CacheFor@ only caches @GET@ and @HEAD@ requests. The cache key defaults to the request URL + querystring; override with @id="my-key"@ on the annotation, or supply a custom @CacheKeyGenerator@ via @generator=MyGenerator.class@.

h2. <a name="fragments">@#{cache}@ template fragment cache</a>

For caching expensive template fragments (rendered HTML, JSON, etc.):

bc. #{cache 'top-products' for:'10min'}
    #{list items:Product.topRated(), as:'p'}
        <li>${p.name} — $${p.price}</li>
    #{/list}
#{/cache}

The first render computes the fragment and stores it; subsequent renders within the TTL serve the stored bytes. Each distinct @for:@ value gets its own backing cache (@play.fragments.10min@, ...) for the same reason as @@CacheFor@.

h2. <a name="provider">Swapping the backend</a>

Apps that need a different cache backend (an EhCache 3 tiered store, an Infinispan-distributed cache, a no-op for unit tests) implement @play.cache.CacheProvider@ and register it via @META-INF/services/play.cache.CacheProvider@. The framework discovers providers through @ServiceLoader@ at boot:

* Zero providers on the classpath → @ConfigurationException@ at boot. Caffeine ships with the framework, so this only fires if you've actively stripped it.
* One provider → it's used.
* Multiple providers → set @cache.provider=<name>@ in @application.conf@; the value must match a provider's @name()@.

bc. // application.conf
cache.provider=ehcache

h2. <a name="testing">Testing with a stub provider</a>

@Caches.installProvider(provider)@ bypasses @ServiceLoader@ and installs a test provider for the current JVM. Useful when you want a deterministic in-memory store without booting Caffeine, or to assert eviction behavior without timing dependencies:

bc. @BeforeEach
void wireTestCache() {
    Caches.installProvider(new MyMapBackedProvider());
}

@AfterEach
void resetCache() {
    Caches.stop();
}

Production code should never call @installProvider@ — it bypasses the SPI selection rules.

h2. <a name="session">Don't use the Session as a cache</a>

If you come from a framework with an in-memory @HttpSession@, you may be surprised that Play allows only a small set of String data in its @Session@. The Session is for identity, not state. Cache server-side data in a @Cache@ instance, keyed by @session.getId()@:

bc. private static final Cache<String, List<Product>> userProducts =
    Caches.named("user.products", CacheConfig.newBuilder()
        .expireAfterAccess(Duration.ofMinutes(30))
        .maximumSize(50_000)
        .build());

public static void putProducts(List<Product> products) {
    userProducts.put(session.getId(), products);
}

public static void getProducts() {
    List<Product> products = userProducts.getIfPresent(session.getId());
    ...
}

The cache is not bound to any User and entries can vanish at any time — design accordingly.

p(note). **Continuing the discussion**

Learn about %(next)"Sending emails":emails%.
