h1. Deployment options

Play 1.12 applications are deployed as **standalone JVM processes** running an embedded Netty server. There is no servlet-container path: the marquee features of this fork — HTTP/2 ALPN, HTTP/3 over QUIC, virtual-thread dispatch — are Netty-exclusive by design.

For the embedded HTTP server's capabilities — HTTP/2, HTTP/3, virtual threads, TLS — see the "HTTP server":httpserver section.

This page covers the two supported deployment topologies: running Play directly, and running it behind a reverse proxy.

h2. <a name="standalone">Standalone Play applications</a>

The simplest deployment is to run Play directly. The embedded Netty server handles thousands of concurrent connections per CPU core, supports long polling, server-sent events, WebSockets, and direct streaming of @File@ and @InputStream@ bodies — without blocking the request thread. Virtual threads (always on in this fork) make blocking I/O calls inside controllers cheap.

Please refer to the "'Put your application in production' page":production for a full pre-flight checklist (logging, secrets, JPA configuration, JVM flags).

h3. Starting and stopping

Start the application in the background:

bc. play start /path/to/myapp

This forks a JVM, redirects stdout and stderr to @logs/system.out@, writes the PID to @server.pid@, and returns. The framework boots in @prod@ mode by default; pass @--%<id>@ to choose a different framework ID (e.g. @--%staging@).

Stop a running instance with:

bc. play stop /path/to/myapp

That reads @server.pid@ and sends a clean shutdown signal so in-flight requests drain.

To restart without dropping the running instance entirely (useful after a config change), call @play stop@ then @play start@ in sequence; for production zero-downtime swaps, run two instances behind a reverse proxy (next section) and rotate them.

h3. Tailing the logs

Once started, tail @logs/system.out@ for stdout/stderr from the JVM and @logs/application.log@ for the framework's log4j2 output:

bc. tail -F /path/to/myapp/logs/system.out
tail -F /path/to/myapp/logs/application.log

If you've enabled JSON logging (@application.log.format=json@), the application log is line-delimited JSON suitable for ingestion by Loki, Elasticsearch, Datadog, etc. See "Structured JSON logging":logs#json.

h3. JVM tuning

Pass JVM flags to @play start@ via the JVM options syntax — @play@ forwards anything matching @-X@ / @-D@ / @-XX:@:

bc. play start /path/to/myapp -Xms2g -Xmx2g -XX:MaxRAMPercentage=75

Virtual threads make per-request stack memory negligible, so the historical "tune @play.pool@ to match cores" guidance no longer applies — those keys are gone in 1.12 (see the boot @WARN@ if your config still references them).

h2. <a name="precompiled">Deploying without source code</a>

When you want to ship only the build artifact — for locked-down servers, lean container images, or distributing a closed-source app to a customer — Play can run from a precompiled bytecode tree alone, with no @app/@ sources on disk. Note that "production mode" (@application.mode=prod@) on its own does not do this: it pre-compiles at boot, but still reads the source tree to do so. The flow below is what lets you omit @app/@ entirely from the deployed artifact.

h3. Step 1 — precompile on the build host

bc. play precompile /path/to/myapp

This compiles every Java class under @app/@ and every Groovy template under @app/views/@ (plus equivalents inside any modules) and writes the bytecode to:

bc. myapp/precompiled/

The directory is regenerated from scratch on each invocation — the command deletes any existing @precompiled/@ and @tmp/@ before running.

h3. Step 2 — assemble the deployment artifact

The runtime needs:

* @precompiled/@ — output from step 1
* @conf/@ — @application.conf@, @routes@, log4j config, messages, keystores
* @lib/@ — runtime dependencies
* @public/@ — static assets

You can omit:

* @app/@ — controllers, models, templates (now living as bytecode under @precompiled/@)
* @test/@ — tests
* @tmp/@ — runtime cache (recreated on boot)
* @build.xml@, @dependencies.yml@ — build-time only

If the host has no @logs/@ directory, the @play@ launcher creates one on first start.

h3. Step 3 — start in precompiled mode

Tell the framework to load from @precompiled/@ instead of recompiling at boot:

bc. play start /path/to/myapp -Dprecompiled=true

The system property forces @prod@ mode and skips both the Java and template compile passes. If @precompiled/@ is missing, the framework logs @"Precompiled classes are missing!!"@ and refuses to start.

h3. Caveats

* @application.mode=dev@ is incompatible with this layout — hot reload requires source files. The @-Dprecompiled=true@ flag implies @prod@ mode regardless of @application.conf@.
* Stack traces reference bytecode line numbers, not source lines. Keep a copy of the matching sources somewhere off the deployment host for debugging.

h2. <a name="reverseproxy">Behind a reverse proxy</a>

For production deployments, most operators front Play with a reverse proxy that handles TLS termination, virtual hosting, request routing, and (optionally) static-asset caching. Common choices:

* "nginx":https://nginx.org/ — most popular self-hosted choice; supports HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 to the client, plus HTTP/1.1 or HTTP/2 to the upstream.
* "HAProxy":https://www.haproxy.org/ — preferred when L4 load balancing or sticky sessions are needed.
* "AWS Application Load Balancer":https://aws.amazon.com/elasticloadbalancing/application-load-balancer/ — terminates TLS and HTTP/2; does **not** forward UDP, so HTTP/3 from clients ends at the ALB and Play sees TCP only.
* "AWS Network Load Balancer":https://aws.amazon.com/elasticloadbalancing/network-load-balancer/ — passes UDP through, so end-to-end HTTP/3 to Play works (TLS terminates at Play).
* "Cloudflare":https://www.cloudflare.com/ — terminates TLS, HTTP/2, and HTTP/3 at the edge; speaks HTTP/1.1 or HTTP/2 to the origin.

h3. TLS termination

You have two patterns. Pick whichever matches your operational model:

**Pattern A — TLS at the edge, plain HTTP to Play.** The proxy holds the cert; Play binds @http.port@ only, no @https.port@. This is the simplest setup when the proxy is on the same private network. Tell Play the canonical scheme and host so reverse routing emits the right URLs:

bc. http.port=9000
XForwardedSupport=127.0.0.1
XForwardedProto=https

**Pattern B — TLS at Play.** Play handles TLS itself, including HTTP/2 ALPN and HTTP/3 QUIC negotiation. The proxy can pass through TCP+UDP transparently (NLB / HAProxy in TCP mode) or speak HTTPS to the origin. Bind both @https.port@ and a PEM cert+key:

bc. https.port=9443
certificate.file=/etc/letsencrypt/live/example.com/fullchain.pem
certificate.key.file=/etc/letsencrypt/live/example.com/privkey.pem

See "HTTP server":httpserver for the full TLS configuration reference, and "Default security headers":security#headers for HSTS settings.

h3. Path-prefix rewriting

If the proxy mounts your app under a subpath (e.g. @example.com/myapp@), tell Play so reverse routing emits the right URLs:

bc. http.path=/myapp

The framework prefixes all generated URLs with this value but does **not** strip it from incoming requests — the proxy is responsible for forwarding the full path.

h3. nginx example

A minimal nginx upstream config terminating TLS at the edge and proxying plain HTTP to Play on @127.0.0.1:9000@:

bc. server {
    listen 443 ssl http2;
    server_name example.com;

    ssl_certificate     /etc/letsencrypt/live/example.com/fullchain.pem;
    ssl_certificate_key /etc/letsencrypt/live/example.com/privkey.pem;

    location / {
        proxy_pass         http://127.0.0.1:9000;
        proxy_http_version 1.1;
        proxy_set_header   Host              $host;
        proxy_set_header   X-Real-IP         $remote_addr;
        proxy_set_header   X-Forwarded-For   $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
        proxy_set_header   X-Forwarded-Proto $scheme;
        proxy_read_timeout 600s;
    }
}

Add @application.conf@:

bc. http.port=9000
XForwardedSupport=127.0.0.1
XForwardedProto=https

For HTTP/3 client support without end-to-end QUIC, enable @listen 443 quic@ in nginx and let nginx emit @Alt-Svc@ on its own.

h3. WebSockets through the proxy

WebSockets need an explicit @Upgrade@ / @Connection@ pass-through. With nginx:

bc. location /ws/ {
    proxy_pass         http://127.0.0.1:9000;
    proxy_http_version 1.1;
    proxy_set_header   Upgrade    $http_upgrade;
    proxy_set_header   Connection "upgrade";
    proxy_read_timeout 86400s;
}

Server-sent events also work over standard @proxy_pass@, but make sure response buffering is off:

bc. proxy_buffering off;

h3. Heroku and other PaaS

PaaS platforms generally just need the app to honor a @PORT@ environment variable. Read it in @application.conf@:

bc. http.port=${PORT}

The platform handles TLS at the edge. See the "VPS / Custom Server":#upstart section below for a generic process-supervisor pattern.

h2. <a name="upstart">Running as a system service</a>

For a long-running process on a Linux server, use systemd, an init script, or a process supervisor. Example systemd unit:

bc. [Unit]
Description=Play Framework — myapp
After=network.target

[Service]
Type=forking
User=play
Group=play
WorkingDirectory=/srv/myapp
PIDFile=/srv/myapp/server.pid
ExecStart=/opt/playframework/play start /srv/myapp --%prod
ExecStop=/opt/playframework/play stop /srv/myapp
Restart=on-failure
RestartSec=5

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target

Then:

bc. systemctl daemon-reload
systemctl enable myapp
systemctl start myapp
journalctl -u myapp -f
