h1. OpenAPI 3 spec generation

The framework generates an "OpenAPI 3":https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.1.0 spec for your application automatically, derived from the @conf/routes@ file plus reflection on your controller method signatures. The spec is exposed at runtime as JSON and YAML, and a "Swagger UI":https://swagger.io/tools/swagger-ui/ page renders it interactively in development mode. Controller-level annotations let you enrich the generated spec with descriptions, response shapes, request body schemas, and tag groupings.

This is a fork-specific feature (see PF-12 and PF-81). It is not part of the upstream Play 1.5 manual.

h2. <a name="endpoints">Endpoints</a>

When your application is running, three endpoints are available:

* @GET /@api/openapi.json@ — the spec serialized as JSON
* @GET /@api/openapi.yaml@ — the same spec serialized as YAML
* @GET /@api/docs@ — a Swagger UI page rendering the spec interactively (returns 404 in @PROD@ mode; available in @DEV@ only)

The @docs@ page loads the Swagger UI distribution from the @unpkg.com@ CDN and points at @/@api/openapi.json@. It works without bundling Swagger UI assets in your application.

h2. <a name="configuration">Configuration</a>

Configure via @application.conf@:

bc.. # OpenAPI spec generation
# /@api/openapi.json and /@api/openapi.yaml expose an OpenAPI 3 spec
# generated from your routes file and controller method signatures.
# /@api/docs serves Swagger UI loaded from unpkg.com — dev mode only.
openapi.enabled=true
openapi.basePath=/@api

p. The defaults are sensible for development; the feature is enabled by default. To disable entirely, set @openapi.enabled=false@. To expose under a different path prefix (for example to integrate with your reverse proxy's path policy), change @openapi.basePath@.

To turn the feature off in @PROD@ but leave it on in @DEV@, use the standard Play prefix syntax:

bc. openapi.enabled=true
%prod.openapi.enabled=false

h2. <a name="default">What you get without any annotations</a>

The generator walks your @conf/routes@ table after Play boots and emits one OpenAPI operation per route. Without any annotations, it infers the following from the route + controller method:

* HTTP method (from the route entry)
* URL path, with @{name}@ path parameters mapped 1:1 to OpenAPI path parameters
* Query parameters, derived from method arguments not present in the URL pattern
* A single @200 OK@ response with @application/json@ content type for typed return values, or a generic content type for @void@ (the common Play case where actions throw a @Result@)

For most apps this is already useful — every route appears in @/@api/openapi.json@, the path parameters are typed, and tools like "openapi-generator-cli":https://openapi-generator.tech can produce client SDKs against it without any further work.

h2. <a name="annotations">Enriching the spec with annotations</a>

For richer metadata — operation summaries, multiple response codes, request body schemas, controller groupings — decorate your action methods and controller classes with the standard @io.swagger.v3.oas.annotations.*@ annotations. These ship with the framework via the @swagger-annotations@ artifact and require no additional dependency on your part.

The framework reads annotations and *merges them on top of* the inferred spec. Annotation-supplied values win over inferred values for the same field; values not declared in annotations remain as inferred. Routes with no annotations behave exactly as described in the previous section.

h3. <a name="operation">Operation: @Operation</a>

Decorate an action with @@Operation@ to set its summary, description, tags, and operationId:

bc.. import io.swagger.v3.oas.annotations.Operation;

public class Users extends Controller {

    @Operation(
        summary = "Fetch a user by id",
        description = "Returns the canonical user record. 404 if the id does not exist.",
        operationId = "getUserById"
    )
    public static void show(Long id) {
        User user = User.findById(id);
        notFoundIfNull(user);
        renderJSON(user);
    }
}

p. The fields @summary@ and @operationId@ default to empty (clients will fall back to the path + method); @description@ defaults to empty; @tags@ defaults to empty list (see below for the class-level @@Tag@ alternative).

h3. <a name="response">Response codes: @ApiResponse and @ApiResponses</a>

By default the spec emits a single @200 OK@ response per operation. Declare additional responses with @@ApiResponse@:

bc.. import io.swagger.v3.oas.annotations.responses.ApiResponse;
import io.swagger.v3.oas.annotations.responses.ApiResponses;

@ApiResponses({
    @ApiResponse(responseCode = "200", description = "User found"),
    @ApiResponse(responseCode = "404", description = "User not found"),
    @ApiResponse(responseCode = "401", description = "Authentication required")
})
public static void show(Long id) { ... }

p. Declared responses *merge* with the inferred 200 — declaring only a 404 still leaves a 200 in the spec. To fully replace the 200 (for example, for a void/202 endpoint), declare a 200 explicitly with the shape you want.

h3. <a name="request-body">Request body: @RequestBody</a>

For @POST@/@PUT@ actions that accept a JSON body, declare its shape with @@RequestBody@:

bc.. import io.swagger.v3.oas.annotations.parameters.RequestBody;
import io.swagger.v3.oas.annotations.media.Content;
import io.swagger.v3.oas.annotations.media.Schema;

@RequestBody(
    description = "User to create",
    required = true,
    content = @Content(schema = @Schema(implementation = User.class))
)
public static void create(User user) {
    user.save();
    renderJSON(user);
}

p. The annotation fully replaces the body shape that would otherwise be inferred from the @user@ argument's @formData@ parsing. Use @@Schema(implementation = SomeBean.class)@ to type the body against an application class; the generator emits a reference to that schema.

h3. <a name="parameter">Parameters: @Parameter</a>

Path and query parameters are inferred from the route + method signature. Use @@Parameter@ on a method argument to override or supplement the inferred parameter:

bc.. import io.swagger.v3.oas.annotations.Parameter;

public static void show(
    @Parameter(name = "id", description = "User id", required = true) Long id
) { ... }

p. Currently only @name@, @description@, @required@, and @schema@ are read. Other @@Parameter@ fields (@array@, @examples@, @style@, @explode@, @allowReserved@) are ignored — the inferred values stand for those.

h3. <a name="tag">Class-level grouping: @Tag</a>

To group all operations from a controller under a single OpenAPI tag (so Swagger UI organizes them visibly), annotate the controller class:

bc.. import io.swagger.v3.oas.annotations.tags.Tag;

@Tag(name = "users", description = "User management")
public class Users extends Controller {

    public static void list() { ... }
    public static void show(Long id) { ... }
    public static void create() { ... }
}

p. Every operation generated from @Users@ then carries @users@ in its @tags@ list. If a method also has its own @@Operation(tags = {...})@, the class-level and method-level tags *union* (deduplicated) — the class tag never replaces method tags or vice versa.

h2. <a name="example">Putting it together</a>

A full annotated controller demonstrating all five annotations:

bc.. package controllers;

import play.mvc.Controller;
import models.User;

import io.swagger.v3.oas.annotations.Operation;
import io.swagger.v3.oas.annotations.Parameter;
import io.swagger.v3.oas.annotations.media.Content;
import io.swagger.v3.oas.annotations.media.Schema;
import io.swagger.v3.oas.annotations.parameters.RequestBody;
import io.swagger.v3.oas.annotations.responses.ApiResponse;
import io.swagger.v3.oas.annotations.responses.ApiResponses;
import io.swagger.v3.oas.annotations.tags.Tag;

@Tag(name = "users", description = "User account management")
public class Users extends Controller {

    @Operation(summary = "List users", description = "All users, paginated.")
    @ApiResponse(responseCode = "200", description = "Page of users")
    public static void list(
        @Parameter(name = "page", description = "1-based page number") Integer page
    ) {
        renderJSON(User.findAll());
    }

    @Operation(summary = "Fetch a user by id")
    @ApiResponses({
        @ApiResponse(responseCode = "200", description = "User found"),
        @ApiResponse(responseCode = "404", description = "User not found")
    })
    public static void show(
        @Parameter(name = "id", description = "User id", required = true) Long id
    ) {
        User user = User.findById(id);
        notFoundIfNull(user);
        renderJSON(user);
    }

    @Operation(summary = "Create a user")
    @RequestBody(
        description = "User to create",
        required = true,
        content = @Content(schema = @Schema(implementation = User.class))
    )
    @ApiResponse(responseCode = "201", description = "User created")
    public static void create(User user) {
        user.save();
        response.status = 201;
        renderJSON(user);
    }
}

h2. <a name="limitations">What's not yet supported</a>

The annotation reader covers the fields most apps need. The following are deliberate scope cuts; the generator falls back to inferred or default values for them. Open a fork ticket if you need any of these:

* @@Schema@ field coverage beyond @implementation@ and @description@. JSON-Schema 2020 keywords (@pattern@, @minimum@, @maximum@, @format@, @example@, @enumAsRef@, @oneOf@/@anyOf@/@allOf@) are not read off annotations; primitive types still get sensible inferred schemas.
* @@Parameter@'s @array@, @examples@, @style@, @explode@, @allowReserved@.
* @@ApiResponse@'s @headers@, @links@, @useReturnTypeSchema@.
* @@RequestBody@'s @useParameterTypeSchema@ and @ref@.
* Bean property recursion. When you reference a bean class via @implementation = SomeBean.class@, the schema is registered as an opaque @ObjectSchema@ — the bean's fields are not walked recursively. Codegen tools will produce a typed wrapper but with loose body shapes. The fix is to produce a full JSON-schema for each referenced bean; tracked separately.

h2. <a name="static-export">Exporting the spec</a>

For CI integration (committing the generated spec for diff review, feeding it into client-codegen pipelines, etc.), curl the running app:

bc. curl http://localhost:9000/@api/openapi.json > openapi.json
curl http://localhost:9000/@api/openapi.yaml > openapi.yaml

p. There is no offline @play openapi@ command yet — the spec is generated only at runtime, because it relies on the loaded routes and reflected controller methods. If your CI flow needs an offline export, start the app in @test@ mode, pull the spec, and stop.
