h1. Play 1.12.0 -- Release notes

Play 1.12.0 is a major release whose headline change is a complete migration of the server transport layer from Netty 3.10.6.Final (June 2016, EOL) to Netty 4.2.12.Final. This brings the framework onto the line of Netty that the JVM ecosystem actively maintains (gRPC-Java, Vert.x, Reactor Netty, Elasticsearch all run on 4.x), closes known unpatched CVEs in the 3.x line (HTTP request smuggling, header validation), and unlocks the Netty 4.2 HTTP/2 codec for future work.

The migration was tracked by epic *PF-3* and broken into staged tickets: PF-30 (umbrella) → PF-31 (dep swap + non-WebSocket HTTP) → PF-32 (large-body disk-spooling) → PF-33 (WebSocket migration + retire deprecated ctors) → PF-34/35/36 (initial audit ship-blockers) → PF-37 through PF-53 (post-migration audit + first Codex review) → PF-54 through PF-66 (second Codex review covering aggregator/encoder traversal, Expect: 100-continue, decoder-failure handling, multipart framing, 2 GiB range overflow, ThreadLocal cleanup, and configuration sanitization).

h2. Breaking changes

h3. Java 25 is now the minimum supported runtime

Play 1.12.x compiles and runs on *Java 25 or later*. Earlier LTS lines (Java 17, Java 21) are no longer supported. The bytecode is emitted at @release="25"@ in @framework/build.xml@ and the bundled modules, so attempting to start a 1.12.x build under an older JVM will fail with @UnsupportedClassVersionError@ before any application code runs.

This unlocks unconditional use of language and library features that were previewed or preview-only on earlier LTS lines, and lets the framework's virtual-thread integration assume the JEP 491 fix (no platform-thread pinning under @synchronized@) is in effect.

If you need to stay on Java 17 or 21, pin to Play 1.11.x.

h3. Application compiler defaults to @java.source=25@

The hot-reload application compiler (@play.classloading.ApplicationCompiler@) defaults @java.source@ to *25* (was @17@ in 1.11.x). The compiler accepts only @25@ as a valid value and rejects JDKs older than 25 at startup; apps that need an earlier source level should stay on Play 1.11.x. Apps that do not set @java.source@ explicitly in @application.conf@ get Java 25 language features (record patterns, sealed types, virtual-thread APIs, etc.) without further configuration.

h3. Public API: ChannelHandlerContext-typed constructors removed

The deprecated Netty-typed constructors on @play.mvc.Http.Inbound@ and @play.libs.F.BlockingEventStream@ (marked @@Deprecated@ in PF-30 Phase 1) have been removed:

* @Http.Inbound(ChannelHandlerContext)@ — removed
* @F.BlockingEventStream(ChannelHandlerContext)@ — removed
* @F.BlockingEventStream(int, ChannelHandlerContext)@ — removed

*Migration path* for apps that subclass @Http.Inbound@ or use @BlockingEventStream@ directly:

bc. // Before (Play 1.11.x and earlier):
new Http.Inbound(ctx) { ... }   // ctx was an org.jboss.netty.channel.ChannelHandlerContext

// After (Play 1.12.x):
new Http.Inbound(playChannel) { ... }   // playChannel is a play.libs.PlayChannel

Most apps don't construct @Http.Inbound@ directly — the framework gives you one via @Http.Inbound.current()@ or as a controller method param. Those apps are unaffected. Apps that wrote test fakes for @Http.Inbound@ should switch to the @PlayChannel@-typed ctor.

h3. Pipeline configuration: handler class names changed

The default value of @play.netty.pipeline@ and @play.ssl.netty.pipeline@ now uses Netty 4 class names. If your @application.conf@ sets either property explicitly, update the FQCNs:

* @org.jboss.netty.handler.codec.http.HttpRequestDecoder@ → @io.netty.handler.codec.http.HttpRequestDecoder@
* @org.jboss.netty.handler.codec.http.HttpResponseEncoder@ → @io.netty.handler.codec.http.HttpResponseEncoder@
* @org.jboss.netty.handler.codec.http.HttpContentCompressor@ → @io.netty.handler.codec.http.HttpContentCompressor@
* @org.jboss.netty.handler.stream.ChunkedWriteHandler@ → @io.netty.handler.stream.ChunkedWriteHandler@
* @play.server.FlashPolicyHandler@ → *removed* (Adobe Flash EOL since December 2020)
* @play.server.StreamChunkAggregator@ → unchanged (rewritten for Netty 4 message model)

h3. @play.netty.maxContentLength@ semantic change

In 1.11.x this property was a per-chunk size cap inside @HttpChunkAggregator@. In 1.12.x it is a *hard request-body cap*: requests above the cap are rejected with *413 Request Entity Too Large* and the connection is closed. Default is @-1@ (unlimited). Set it explicitly if you want to enforce a per-deployment limit.

h3. New configuration: @play.netty.spoolThresholdBytes@

Bodies smaller than this threshold are aggregated in memory; bodies above it are spooled to a temp file under @Play.tmpDir@. Default 1 MB. Tuning guidance:

* Upload-heavy workloads (concurrent file uploads): drop to 64 KB to cap heap pressure
* Low-concurrency JSON APIs: raise to 4 MB if you want to keep more in memory

The temp file is cleaned up automatically when the request completes (success or exception); on connection drop mid-upload, the partial file is deleted by the aggregator's @channelInactive@ handler.

h3. Removed classes

* @play.server.FlashPolicyHandler@ — Flash EOL December 2020
* @play.server.FileChannelBuffer@ — was a Netty 3 @ChannelBuffer@ wrapper; replaced by the spool-file flow inside the new @StreamChunkAggregator@

h2. What's new in Play 1.12.0

* *PF-30 / PF-31 / PF-32 / PF-33*: Migrate server transport from Netty 3.10.6.Final to Netty 4.2.12.Final
* *PF-32*: New @play.netty.spoolThresholdBytes@ config to control in-memory vs disk-spooled body aggregation
* *PF-33*: WebSocket per-channel state moved from a static @Map<ChannelHandlerContext, Inbound>@ to Netty 4 @AttributeKey@ — better GC behaviour and no static-map accumulation
* *PF-31*: @ant unittest@ target gained a @-javaagent@ + tests-tmp fork so it actually exercises the framework's bytecode-instrumentation agent (previously broken; many tests reported false failures)
* *PF-31*: New @agent-jar@ Ant target builds the agent jar without the heavyweight clean+modules cycle, speeding up local test iteration

h2. What's fixed in Play 1.12.0 (post-migration audit)

The migration shipped a multi-agent code review and an external Codex review that together surfaced twenty findings. All twenty have been fixed in 1.12.0.

Audit ship-blockers (fixed first):

* *PF-34*: Fix WebSocket @Http.Outbound.close()@ / @futureClose()@ data race — the EventLoop callback now synchronises on the same monitor as @close()@ and @isOpen()@, eliminating a JMM hazard where the close promise could be silently skipped
* *PF-35*: Fix @ByteBuf@ leak in @serve500@ — three call sites previously allocated an @Unpooled.copiedBuffer@ that was never released; now use the @byte[]@ overload of @writeBytes@ directly
* *PF-36*: Fix HEAD requests on error paths sending a body — RFC 7230 §3.3.2 violation; @serve404@, @serve500@, and @serveStatic@ error fallback now respect HEAD by passing @Unpooled.EMPTY_BUFFER@ as response content while preserving @Content-Length@

Internal audit follow-ups:

* *PF-37*: @StreamChunkAggregator@ now strips only the @chunked@ token from @Transfer-Encoding@; coexisting codings such as @gzip@ are preserved so the controller can still decode the body
* *PF-38*: Install Netty's @WebSocketFrameAggregator@ after the handshake so fragmented messages are reassembled before reaching the controller
* *PF-39*: Server-initiated close now writes a @CloseWebSocketFrame@ with status 1000 ("Normal Closure") via the handshaker before disconnecting; peers no longer see 1006
* *PF-40*: @LazyChunkedInput@ now stores raw bytes; the previous Netty 3-style manual chunk-encoding double-wrapped frames under Netty 4's @HttpResponseEncoder@. The terminator is now emitted by @LastHttpContent.EMPTY_LAST_CONTENT@
* *PF-41*: @FileService@ now writes the body without a flush, then writeAndFlush the @LastHttpContent@; the keep-alive close listener attaches to the trailer's future so the channel is not closed before the chunked body has drained
* *PF-42*: @FileService@ closes the @ChunkedInput@ (which owns the @RandomAccessFile@) when the channel was already closed before the write started, eliminating a per-request RAF leak under client-disconnect
* *PF-43*: @PlayHandler.staticPathsCache@ migrated to @ConcurrentHashMap@; the previous unsynchronized @containsKey@ raced with the worker-thread @put@ on the @RenderStatic@ catch path

External Codex review fixes:

* *PF-44*: 413 oversize rejections now delete the partial spool file before clearing the reference; the @cleanupSpool()@ helper deliberately does not delete (the success path transfers ownership), so the rejection path needed an explicit unlink
* *PF-45*: Plugin @rawInvocation@ paths now run @cleanupSpooledBody@ themselves; previously this only ran inside @NettyInvocation@, leaking one temp file per upload that hit the spool threshold whenever a plugin short-circuited the controller
* *PF-46*: Suspended requests defer spool cleanup until the resumed @run()@ completes — a new @suspended@ flag set in the @suspend()@ override and reset at the start of every @run()@ keeps the body alive across the suspend/resume boundary
* *PF-47*: Malformed @Range@ headers (missing @bytes=@ prefix, non-numeric values, etc.) no longer NPE inside @ChunkedWriteHandler@; @ByteRangeInput@ now initialises @byteRanges@ to an empty array on parse failure and @isEndOfInput()@ guards against null
* *PF-48*: Suffix-range parsing (e.g. @Range: bytes=-N@) is fixed; the previous formula returned @N+1@ bytes (off by one). Now correctly returns the last @N@ bytes
* *PF-49*: @HttpServerPipelineFactory.classes@ migrated to @ConcurrentHashMap@; the previous shared @HashMap.computeIfAbsent@ raced under concurrent @initChannel@ calls
* *PF-50*: Pipeline FQCNs from @play.netty.pipeline@ / @play.ssl.netty.pipeline@ are now trimmed before @Class.forName@; previously a leading space (e.g. after a comma) killed pipeline construction
* *PF-51*: PEM SSL trust manager now passes a @load(null, null)@-initialised empty keystore to @TrustManagerFactory.init()@; the previous uninitialised keystore threw @KeyStoreException@ on JDK 17+
* *PF-52*: @multipart/byteranges@ responses now emit a properly-formatted document — fixed the @Content-Range@ header (was @ContentRange@), added inter-part CRLF separators, and emitted the closing @--boundary--@ delimiter
* *PF-53*: @configuration.textile@ now documents @play.netty.maxContentLength@ (semantic change), @play.netty.spoolThresholdBytes@ (new), and the @play.threads.virtual.*@ family

Second-round Codex audit (P1 ship-blockers):

* *PF-54*: @rejectOversize@ now writes via @ctx.channel().writeAndFlush(...)@ so the 413 response traverses @HttpResponseEncoder@. Outbound from the aggregator's handler context flowed head-ward and skipped the encoder entirely, shipping a raw @FullHttpResponse@ object that never reached the wire as HTTP — clients saw a connection close instead of 413
* *PF-55*: @StreamChunkAggregator@ now handles @Expect: 100-continue@ — strict upload clients (curl @--expect100@, Apache HttpClient with @ExpectContinue=true@) waited forever before sending the body. We respond with 100 Continue immediately, or 413 if @Content-Length@ exceeds @play.netty.maxContentLength@
* *PF-56*: @StreamChunkAggregator@ now checks @decoderResult().isFailure()@ on incoming @HttpRequest@ and @HttpContent@ messages and responds with 400 Bad Request + connection close. Without this guard the aggregator would happily concatenate partial bytes from a malformed chunked stream and dispatch it as a fresh "successful" @FullHttpRequest@
* *PF-57*: Multi-range @Content-Length@ now includes the closing @--boundary--@ trailer that @readChunk()@ emits. Without it, the trailer bytes overran @Content-Length@ and corrupted the framing of the *next* response on a keep-alive connection
* *PF-58*: @ByteRangeInput.isEndOfInput()@ now scans every range from the cursor to the end. The previous check observed only @byteRanges[currentByteRange]@; if a part body filled exactly @chunkSize@, @ChunkedWriteHandler@ saw remaining()==0 on the just-finished range and stopped the response with later parts (and the closing boundary) unsent

Second-round Codex audit (P2):

* *PF-59*: @parseRequest@ now wraps the post-spool-acquisition path in a try/catch that closes the @FileInputStream@ and unlinks the temp file before rethrowing. A non-numeric port in the @Host@ header (e.g. @Host: example.com:abc@) had been leaking one temp file per request because the spool channel attribute was already cleared by @getAndSet(null)@ before the parse error fired
* *PF-60*: IO-thread @Http.Request.current@ is now updated to the parsed @Request@ before plugin @rawInvocation@ runs. Previously it pointed at the blank placeholder ctor, so plugins that read @Http.Request.current()@ from inside @rawInvocation@ saw the wrong cookies, headers, body, and params
* *PF-61*: @NettyInvocation._finally@ and @WebSocketInvocation._finally@ now @remove()@ the @Request@/@Response@/@Scope@/@Inbound@/@Outbound@ ThreadLocals; the IO-thread @channelRead@ does the same in its outer @finally@. A long-idle keep-alive connection (or a worker thread between dispatches) no longer pins the previous request's parsed body in memory until the next message overwrites the slot
* *PF-62*: 500 path now respects @cookie.sendOnError@ — only cookies the application opted in to are emitted on a failed action. @ServletWrapper.serve500@ has always followed this rule (see @play.server.ServletWrapper:382@); the Netty path was permissive and could persist partial Session/Flash/Lang state across a failed action
* *PF-63*: 416 responses now send @Content-Range: bytes */<fileLength>@ per RFC 7233 §4.2. The previous @bytes 0-(fileLength-1)/fileLength@ form was non-spec and degenerated to the actively-invalid @bytes 0--1/0@ for empty files
* *PF-64*: @ByteRange.servedRange@ widened from @int@ to @long@ so single-range responses past 2 GiB (4 K video, large archives) don't overflow the counter — overflow had corrupted both @remaining()@ and the @raf.seek(start + servedRange)@ call, jumping the file pointer backwards and either erroring out or looping on the same chunk
* *PF-65*: @HttpServerPipelineFactory@ and @SslHttpServerPipelineFactory@ now sanitize @play.netty.maxContentLength@ before passing it to a user-wired @HttpObjectAggregator@. Netty's ctor rejects negatives with @IllegalArgumentException@, so the documented "unlimited" sentinel @-1@ was silently dropping the explicit aggregator from the pipeline. We promote any negative value to @Integer.MAX_VALUE@
* *PF-66*: WebSocket frame/message cap now treats @-1@ as @Integer.MAX_VALUE@ for symmetry with the HTTP request body cap. The previous code coerced negative values to a hard 65345, which contradicted the documented "unlimited" semantic for HTTP

h2. Performance and operational notes

h3. Boot-time bind failures are now loud

In 1.11.x, a port-already-in-use bind failure could pass silently in some configurations. 1.12.0's @ServerBootstrap.bind(addr).syncUninterruptibly()@ produces a clean stack trace pointing at @Server.<init>@. If you previously relied on Play silently falling through on bind conflicts, that no longer happens.

h3. Refcount discipline

Netty 4 reference-counted @ByteBuf@s are the framework's biggest behavioural change. Direct memory leaks are the #1 source of subtle Netty 4 production bugs. We recommend running production-equivalent load tests under @-Dio.netty.leakDetection.level=PARANOID@ before promoting to PROD; this is the gate that surfaces missed @release()@ calls.

h3. Threading model

Virtual threads are unconditional for request invocation, background jobs, and mail dispatch as of 1.12.x. 1.12.0 originally shipped this as opt-in via @play.threads.virtual=true@; subsequent 1.12.x patches removed the toggle, retired the platform-thread executor paths, and made VT execution the only path. The Netty event loop ↔ virtual threads boundary itself is unchanged; the @Invoker@'s handoff seam was not modified by the toggle removal. Operators upgrading from 1.12.0 should remove any @play.threads.virtual*@, @play.pool@, or @play.jobs.pool@ entries from @application.conf@ — the framework emits a @WARN@ at boot if any are still present.

h2. Verification

This release was verified by:

* @ant clean unittest@: 299/299 tests pass
* Manual smoke gates: HTTP GET, small in-memory POST, large (5 MB) spooled POST, WebSocket handshake + ping/pong/text/binary frame round-trip, sustained load (5,200 hits) under @-Dio.netty.leakDetection.level=PARANOID@ with zero @LEAK:@ markers
* Multi-agent post-migration code audit (refcount, concurrency, protocol, performance, API/test-coverage) plus two external Codex reviews — thirty-three findings total (PF-34 through PF-66), all addressed in this release

h2. Upgrade checklist

# Audit your @application.conf@ for explicit @play.netty.pipeline@ / @play.ssl.netty.pipeline@ values that reference @org.jboss.netty.*@ class names — update FQCNs to @io.netty.*@
# Remove any reference to @play.server.FlashPolicyHandler@ (deleted)
# If your code subclasses @Http.Inbound@ or constructs @F.BlockingEventStream@ with a @ChannelHandlerContext@, migrate to the @PlayChannel@-typed ctor
# Decide whether to set @play.netty.maxContentLength@ explicitly (it now hard-rejects with 413 instead of being a chunk-size cap)
# Optionally tune @play.netty.spoolThresholdBytes@ for your workload pattern
# If your app needs an earlier Java syntax level (e.g. 17 or 21), stay on Play 1.11.x — Play 1.12.x accepts only @java.source=25@ and rejects pre-25 JDKs at startup
# Run your test suite under @-Dio.netty.leakDetection.level=PARANOID@ to catch any application-side @ByteBuf@ refcount issues

h2. What's shipped across the 1.12.x line

The 1.12.0 release covered the foundational Netty 4.2 / Java 25 / virtual-threads migration. The patches that followed turned 1.12 into a production-grade microservices framework with zero-config defaults for cloud deployment. Highlights:

h3. HTTP server (PF-57, PF-58)

* *HTTP/2 over TLS* via ALPN — always advertised when @https.port@ is configured. ALPN-capable clients negotiate @h2@; older clients fall back to @http/1.1@ on the same listener. No @http2.enabled@ flag.
* *HTTP/3 over QUIC* — auto-enabled on platforms with native QUIC binaries (macOS arm64/x86_64, Linux x86_64/arm64, Windows x86_64). Browsers discover the h3 endpoint via the @Alt-Svc@ header that's emitted on every TLS-protected response. Graceful WARN-and-skip on platforms without native support.
* *Brotli, gzip, deflate, zstd* compression with platform-specific brotli natives.

See the "HTTP server":httpserver section.

h3. Security headers (PF-5)

A new @SecurityHeadersPlugin@ emits a conservative baseline on every response: @X-Content-Type-Options: nosniff@, @X-Frame-Options: DENY@, @Referrer-Policy: strict-origin-when-cross-origin@, @X-XSS-Protection: 0@, and (on HTTPS) @Strict-Transport-Security@. Every header is individually overridable via @http.headers.*@ keys, and per-response application overrides win over framework defaults. Content-Security-Policy is intentionally disabled in fresh @play new@ apps so starter pages aren't blocked before the developer has designed a real CSP. See the "security guide":security#headers.

h3. Built-in CORS (PF-6)

A new @CorsPlugin@ handles preflight @OPTIONS@ short-circuiting and adds CORS headers to all cross-origin responses. Disabled by default (opt-in via @cors.enabled=true@). Supports wildcard and specific origin lists, credentials, custom methods/headers, and exposed headers. See the "security guide":security#cors.

h3. SameSite cookies (PF-7)

@Http.Cookie@ has a @sameSite@ field (defaulting to @Lax@) and the netty serializer emits the attribute correctly. Session and flash cookies honor @application.session.sameSite@ in @application.conf@; @SameSite=None@ auto-upgrades the cookie to @Secure@ per RFC.

h3. PBKDF2 password hashing (PF-8)

@Crypto.passwordHash@ now uses PBKDF2 instead of the legacy MD5 default. Old MD5 hashes can still be verified for backward compatibility.

h3. Structured JSON logging (PF-9)

Set @application.log.format=json@ to emit ECS-shaped JSON log lines via Log4j 2's @JsonTemplateLayout@ — broad compatibility with Loki, Datadog, Splunk, Elastic. Request context (@request_id@, @http_method@, @http_path@, @client_ip@, @action_name@) flows via Log4j MDC. Default @text@ mode is unchanged. See "logging":logs#json.

h3. Environment variable interpolation (PF-10)

@${ENV_VAR}@ and @${ENV_VAR:-default}@ are now resolved in @application.conf@ at config load time. Unresolved placeholders without defaults log a @WARN@ at startup. See "configuration":configuration#envvar.

h3. Health endpoints (PF-11)

* @/@health/live@ — always 200 when the JVM is up.
* @/@health/ready@ — aggregates registered @HealthCheck@ instances; 200 if all UP, 503 if any DOWN.

Extensible via the @HealthCheck@ SPI: implement @name()@ and @check()@, register via @HealthCheckPlugin.register(...)@. See "observability":observability#health.

h3. OpenAPI 3 spec generation (PF-12, PF-81)

Auto-generates an OpenAPI 3 spec from your @routes@ file and controller method signatures, exposed at @/@api/openapi.json@, @/@api/openapi.yaml@, and Swagger UI at @/@api/docs@ in dev mode. Decorate controllers with @@Operation@, @@ApiResponse(s)@, @@RequestBody@, @@Parameter@, and class-level @@Tag@ for richer metadata. No JAX-RS dependency. See "OpenAPI":openapi.

h3. Micrometer metrics + Prometheus + OTLP (PF-13, PF-82)

* @/@metrics@ returns Prometheus exposition format. JVM binders auto-registered (memory, GC, threads, classloader). HTTP request metrics (@http_server_requests@ Timer with @method@/@status@/@route@ tags) wired into @ActionInvoker@.
* Static @play.libs.Metrics@ facade for application code: @counter@, @timer@, @gauge@.
* Optional OTLP push: set @metrics.otlp.endpoint@ and metrics also push to OTel Collector / Honeycomb / Datadog / etc. via a @CompositeMeterRegistry@. Prometheus scrape continues alongside. See "observability":observability.

h4. Cache + connection-pool binders (PF-85, PF-86, PF-87 — added in 1.12.34/1.12.35/1.12.36)

The base PF-13 surface emits JVM and HTTP metrics. PF-85 / PF-86 / PF-87 extend that to the cache and database layers so pool exhaustion, cache hit-rate degradation, and Hibernate L2 effectiveness all show up in the same scrape.

* *HikariCP pool (PF-85)* — every @HikariDataSource@ created by @HikariDataSourceFactory@ attaches @MicrometerMetricsTrackerFactory@. Emits @hikaricp_connections@, @hikaricp_connections_active@, @hikaricp_connections_idle@, @hikaricp_connections_pending@ (the queue-depth signal under exhaustion), @hikaricp_connections_acquire_seconds@, @hikaricp_connections_creation_seconds@, @hikaricp_connections_usage_seconds@, @hikaricp_connections_timeout_total@. Multi-DB tagged with @pool=&lt;dbName&gt;@.
* *Caffeine framework cache (PF-86)* — the in-process cache exposed via @play.cache.Cache@ binds @CaffeineCacheMetrics@ as @cache_size@, @cache_gets_total@ (with @result=hit|miss@), @cache_evictions_total@, @cache_load_duration_seconds@. Tagged with @cache=&quot;play_cache&quot;@.
* *Hibernate aggregate (PF-86 follow-up)* — @HibernateMetrics@ binds per @SessionFactory@ at JPA startup, tagged @db=&lt;dbName&gt;@. Emits @hibernate_connections_obtained@, @hibernate_transactions@, @hibernate_flushes@, @hibernate_cache_requests@, and the dedicated @hibernate_second_level_cache_*@ series. *@hibernate.generate_statistics@ is now defaulted to true* via @putIfAbsent@ — apps that explicitly disable statistics in their config win, but the default-on path means the binder produces non-zero values out of the box.
* *Hibernate L2 (JCache)* — when L2 is configured with @hibernate.cache.region.factory_class=org.hibernate.cache.jcache.JCacheRegionFactory@, every region the @SessionFactory@ uses is bound through @JCacheMetrics@, tagged @db=&lt;dbName&gt;@. Apps without L2 — or with a non-JCache region factory like Infinispan — silently skip this binding.
* *PF-87 — javax.persistence opt-in for Hibernate metrics* — Micrometer 1.13.x..1.16.x ships @HibernateMetrics@ with a legacy overload that declares @throws javax.persistence.PersistenceException@. The JVM linker resolves that throws-clause type during class verification, so on this jakarta-only fork the class fails to load with @NoClassDefFoundError@ before any reflection runs. The framework probes for @javax.persistence.EntityManagerFactory@ at boot and, if absent (the expected state), logs an INFO line per data source and skips the bind. Operators who want the @hibernate_*@ aggregate metrics can opt in by adding @javax.persistence -&gt; javax.persistence-api 2.2@ (or any other source of the legacy package) to their app's @conf/dependencies.yml@. The HikariCP, Caffeine, and JCache binders are unaffected.

h4. 1.12.37 — multi-DB pool tags + dev-reload Hikari rebind

Two follow-up fixes shipped after a code-review audit of the PF-85/86/87 wiring:

* *Multi-DB Hikari pool naming* — @HikariDataSourceFactory@ now calls @setPoolName(dbConfig.configName)@ before attaching the tracker. The @pool=@ tag on every @hikaricp_*@ meter is the human-readable DB name (@default@, @secondary@, @tenant_47@, ...) instead of Hikari's auto-generated @HikariPool-1@, @HikariPool-2@. Critical for multi-DB / multi-tenant deployments where the tag is the only way to attribute pool exhaustion to a specific data source.
* *Dev-mode hot-reload tracker rebind* — @MetricsPlugin.onApplicationStart@ now re-attaches the @MicrometerMetricsTrackerFactory@ to every active @HikariDataSource@ against the freshly installed registry. Previously, a dev reload (where @DBPlugin.changed()@ returns false and the existing pool is reused) silently dropped @hikaricp_*@ from @/@metrics@ because the tracker still pointed at the closed @PrometheusMeterRegistry@ from the prior plugin lifecycle. No-op on cold start.

h3. Build infrastructure

* *@ant test@ as the single ordered verification entrypoint* (PF-80) — clean → jar → unittest → integration-test → cli-test, all in one invocation. Cold-start fixed (PF-79): @compile-tests@ now depends on @agent-jar@ so the test JVM can load the framework agent.
* *@ant resolve@ Maven Central fallback* (PF-83) — newly declared dependencies in @dependencies.yml@ are auto-fetched from Maven Central; no manual jar pre-seeding.
* *@samples-and-tests/@ removed* — replaced by an in-tree integration testapp (@framework/test-src/integration/testapp/@) that @ant integration-test@ exercises directly.

h3. ServletWrapper / WAR removal (PF-78)

@ServletWrapper@, the @play war@ CLI command, the @WEB-INF/web.xml@ template, and the @jakarta.servlet-api@ dependency are gone. Apps that were deployed via @play war@ must switch to the embedded Netty path (@play run@ / @play start@) and front it with a reverse proxy if they need a container.

h3. Deprecated API removal (PF-76)

The 14-arg @Http.Request.createRequest@ overload is removed. Adapter modules that built @Request@ instances via the legacy form must migrate to @createRequest(new Request.RequestData(...))@.

h3. Documentation (PF-84)

The manual is now officially Play 1.12 — WAR / JEE / GAE / Stax sections were stripped from @deployment.textile@, @samples-and-tests@ references were cleared, the version label was relabeled, and new sections were added for HTTP server, OpenAPI, observability, security extensions, JSON logging, and env-var interpolation.
